# Async, Await

[video link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ThjvMReOXYM)

## Async

Async function is a function that returns `impl Future`. The `Future` trait obj
is sth that will be ready in the future.

Await waits for future complete, `future.get()` in cpp. Future does nothing
untils it is `await`ed. It is also a point where the control is transferred up
the await stack and something else gets to be polled. e.g. if foo1 has a select!
over foo2.await and foo3.await, and in foo2 there's foo4.await, if foo4 is not
ready yet, foo1 polls foo3 as well. In executor crate, the runtime is the
highest that keeps track of all things that could be awaited on, and yield to
kernel when all things aren't ready. It uses epoll or other primitives and could
be woke by kernel if anything it watches for changes.

Async chuck could be thought of executed in a block, between two `await`s. This
is coordinated scheduling.

## Await

Await yields until the future is ready. Yield yields until some progress happens
using OS primitives

One use of future is to try multiple things. Good for any IO

The executor crate like `tokio` provides IO fds and the top main execution
cycle. It watches everything under it that it could await for, when everything
it manages is not ready yet (yields), it yields to the kernel with all things to
watch for (epoll)

`tokio::main` just makes everything a async block that the executor blocks on.

`select!` waits for the first that completes, others can be in intermediate
state as they are terminated.

`join` and `join_all` executes all input futures concurrently and waits for all
of them are completed, returning result in order.
`futures::stream::FuturesUnordered` doesn't return in order, push in all the
futures and loop through it with await, each time a single result is returned.

`tokio` runtime `block_on` only awaits the single async main function passed
into it, even if there are multiple futures in that async main. This only runs
it on one thread even if executor starts multiple

### Spawn

`tokio::spawn` moves the future to the executor, now it can run besides the
async main future, getting picked up by another thread. `spawn` needs future to
be static, i.e. doesn't refer to sth outside of it, of which the lifetime is
unknown. `tokio::spawn` returns a future to the return value, which has to be
waited on.

using `spawn` also "reserves" core for the async block submitted.

Note: cpp's `std::async(std::launch::async, func)` and rust's
`tokio::spawn(async { ... })` both start execution immediately after called, but
just creating a `let fut = async { ... }` in rust won't execute it until
`fut.await` is called.

### Future

Future is "transpiled" into a StateMachine that has variable chunks of codes as
variant, where the states are the local variables kept across await points.
Because during the await the function "returns" and the variables could't be on
the stack. `impl Future` is actually a a StateMachine, each continuation of the
future continues that state machine (that holds local variables in the chunk).

If a chunk of code creates another future, the state machine stores the inner
state machine in its fields, possibly resulting in a huge struct that need to be
passed around when returning Future. 

When returning / passing a future, it (the state machine that keeps many local
variables) gets memcpy'd around, `tokio::spawn` sends the future to executor and
only keeps a handle (a ptr to the future), so there are less memcpy. Another way
is to `Box` the future to place it on heap using `Box::pin`.

Here Pin is needed because the state machine generated by the compiler to impl
Future for async fns would contain self-reference once it is first `poll`ed
upon, which decides that the state machine should not be moved. Subsequent
`poll`s will rely on this ref to phys mem location. That's also why once a
Future is await'd on, it cannot be moved again until it's Unpin.

### Async func in Trait

Async trait is not supported yet (it gets rewritten into `fn foo() -> impl
Future<Output = ...>`), however the size of the future depends on the local
variable size of the implementation, which is unknown at compile time.

`async_trait` crate rewrites all Async trait and impl into `fn foo ->
Pin<Box<dyn Future<Output = ...>>>`, but now all futures are heap allocated. 

Another approach is to declare associated `type CallFuture: Future<Output =
...>;` Then `fn call() -> Self::CallFuture`, when impl the associated type is
declared and known to the compiler

### Async Mutex

Don't use `std::Mutex` with async func, if some job goes `await` holding the
mutex guard while another executor job on the same thread waits on the mutex,
the thread is blocked and no progress could be made to the job that's in await
as well => deadlock! 

`tokio::sync::Mutex` is async-aware, solves this problem but is a lot slower. So
use `std::Mutex` as long as the cruitical section does not contain any `await`
points and it is short (if it is long, it holds on to the thread + lock without
any yield point). 

Don't async spawn something that is not cooperative scheduled.

Future after yield is not guaranteed to run on same thread after yield.

future panic will take effect when executor thread polls it. The stack trace
will not include the function that spawned it (it just pushes future to the job
queue)

When a future panicks, the call trace will not include the invoking async fn.
tracing_future crate includes an `instrument` method to aid debugging.
